{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
accessibilit\'e0\
AA.VV., L\'92accessibilit\'e0 al patrimonio museale per le persone con minorazione visiva, CD-ROM Le dispense del Museo Omero,\
Ancona 2014\
\
Tioli2016\
AA.VV., L\'92arte a portata di mano. Verso una pedagogia di accesso ai Beni Culturali senza barriere, Atti del convegno\
Portonovo di Ancona 21-23 ottobre 2004, Roma 2006\
\
Bellini2000\
Bellini, A., Toccare l\'92Arte. L\'92educazione estetica di ipovedenti e non vedenti, Roma 2000\
\
Cetorelli2004\
Cetorelli Schivo, G., Colcerasa, M., Disabilit\'e0 e museo. Percorrenze culturali di emergenza, in \'93Museo e territorio\'94,\
Atti della III giornata di studi (Velletri 7-8 marzo 2003), Roma 2004\
\
Hersh2008\
Hersh, M, Johnson, M.A. (Eds.), Assistive Technology for Visually Impaired and Blind People, Glasgow 2008\
\
Jansson2003\
Jansson, G., Bergamasco, M., Frisoli, A., A new option for the visually impaired to experience 3D art at museums: manual\
exploration of virtual copies, in \'93Visual Impairment Research\'94, 5,1, 2003, pp. 1\'9612\
\
Licordari2015\
Licordari, F., Tituli in artis operibus inscripti: proposta di allestimento di una mostra nei locali della Fondazione\
Sorgente, tesi di laurea della Scuola di Specializzazione in Beni Archeologici, Roma 2015\
\
Levi2015\
Levi, F., L\'92accessibilit\'e0 alla cultura per i disabili visivi. Storia e orientamenti, Torino 2015\
\
Velestino2007\
Velestino, D., Simili, G., Poscolieri, M. (Eds.), Messaggi dalla pietra, Torino 2007\
\
\
%10\
\
alfoldi1995\
ALF\'d6LDY, G. \'93Eine Bauinschrift aus dem Colosseum\'94 ZPE 109 (1995) 195-226. \
\
bodel2001\
BODEL, J. Epigraphic Evidence, New York, 2001.\
\
buonocore2015\
BUONOCORE, M., \'93Epigraphic Research from it\'92s Inception: the Contribution of Manuscriptions\'94 in Bruun and Edmunson,\
2015, 21-37.\
\
buraselis2000\
BURASELIS, K., Kos. Between Hellenism and Rome, Studies on the Political, Institutional and Social History of Kos from\
ca. the Middle of the Second Century BC Until Late Antiquity. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society vol.\
90, part 4, Philadelphia, 2000.\
\
bruun2015\
BRUUN, C and EDMONSON, J. Oxford Handbook of Roman Epigraphy, Oxford, 2015. \
\
\
calabi1991\
CALABI LIMENTANI, I., Epigrafia latina 4th edition, Milan, 1991.\
\
cooley2012\
COOLEY, A. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy, \\ Cambridge, 2012. \
\
cooley2014\
\{\}- \'93Paratextual perspectives upon the SC de Pisone patre\'94 Jansen, L (ed) The Roman Paratext, Cambridge, 2014.\
\
chaniotis2004\
CHANIOTIS, A., New Inscriptions from Aphrodisias (1995-2001) in AJA 108 (2004) 377-416.\
\
Manzella1987\
\
Manzella1995\
\{\}- \'93Problemi di paleograf\'eda in epigr\'e1fica latina.\'94 in Solin, Salomie and Liertz, 1995, 163-181.\
\
Manzella2007\
\{\}- \'93Le integrazione tra testo e manufatto/monument in epigrafia\'94 in Acta XII Congressus Epigraphiae Graecae et Latinae.\
ed. \\ M. Mayer et al. (2007) 393-418.\
\
calder1962\
CALDER W. \\& CORMACK J.M.R., Monumenta Asiae Minoris Antiqua vol. VIII, Manchester, 1962.\
\
doruk1990\
Doruk in Roueche and Erim 1990, 66-74.\
\
eck2010\
ECK, W., \'93There Are No Cursus Honorum Inscriptions\'94 in Monument und Inschrift. Berlin, 2010. . \
\
Elliot2015\
Tom Elliot\'92s work (chapter 5) in Bruun and Edmundson 2015, 78-85.\
\
graham2013\
GRAHAM, A., \'93The Word is not Enough. A new methodology for assessing monumental inscriptions: A Case Study in Ephesus\'94\
AJA 117, 1-30. \
\
graham2015\
\{\}-(forthcoming) \'93Reappraising the Value of Same Text Relationships\'94 in A. Petrovic (ed. ) Text and Materiality, New\
York, 2015. \\ \
\
Gordon1957\
Gordon, \'93Supralineate Abbreviations\'94 1957, 111.\
\
harris1989\
HARRIS, W., Ancient Literacy, Cambridge, 1989.\
\
hommel1970\
HOMMEL. H., \'93Das Datum der Munatier-Grabst\'e4tte in Portus Traiani und die Hederae distinguentes\'94 \\ ZPE 5 (1970) 293-303. \
\
gordon1957\
GORDON A. \\& GORDON J., Contributions to the Palaeography of Latin Inscriptions, Berkeley, 1957. \
\
grasby2002\
GRASBY R., \'93Latin Inscriptions: Studies in Measurement and Making\'94 PBSR 70 (2002) 151-176. \
\
1996\
\
mama8\
MAMA volume VIII, 1962\
\
panciera1995\
PANCIERA, S., \'93La produzione epigrafica di Roma in et\'e0 repubblicana\'94 in Solin, Salomies and Liertz (ed) 1995, 319-342. \
\
panciera2012\
\{\}- \'93What is an inscription? Problems of definition and identity in an historical source.\'94 ZPE 183 (2012) 1-10. \
\
macdonald1992\
MACDONALD, D., \\ The Coinage of Aphrodisias London 1992.\
\
petrucci1993\
PETRUCCI, A., Public Lettering, Script and Power, Chicago, 1993. \
\
reynolds1980\
REYNOLDS, J. \'91The Origins and Beginnings of the Imperial Cult at Aphrodisias,\'92 PCPS 206 (1980) 70-84. \
\
reynolds1982\
\{\}- Aphrodisias and Rome, London 1982.\
\
reynolds1990\
\{\}- Inscriptions and the building of the Temple of Aphrodite\'92, C. Rouech\'e9 and K.T. Erim (eds.), Aphrodisias Papers 1\
\\ Ann Arbor, 1990 37-40.\
\
reynolds1999\
\\ \{\}-\'91The First known Aphrodisian to hold a curatorship\'92 in P. Scherrer, H. Thur et al. \\ Steine und Wege: Festschrift\
f\'fcr Dieter Knibbe zum 65. Gerburtstag \\ Vienna (1999) 327-334.\
\
\
ROUECH\'c91996\
\
\{\}-C. Rouech\'e9 and R.R.R. Smith (eds.), Aphrodisias Papers 3, \\ Ann Arbor, 1996.\
\
ROUECH\'c92004\
\{\}- Aphrodisias in Late Antiquity: The Late Roman and Byzantine Inscriptions, revised second edition, 2004, online\
publication http://insaph.kcl.ac.uk/ala2004/\
\
ReynoldsRouecheBodard2007\
\{\}- Reynolds, J. and Bodard, G. (eds.). 2007. The Inscriptions of Aphrodisias online publication.\
http://insaph.kcl.ac.uk/iaph2007/index.html).\
\
solin1995\
SOLIN, H., SALOMIES, O., LIERTZ, U.-M. (eds.), Acta Colloqui Epigraphici Latini Helsingiae 3-6 sept 1991 habiti (1995)\
CommHumLitt. 104 Helsinki.\
\
smith1995\
SMITH, R.R.R. and Ratte, C., \'93Archaeological Research at Aphrodisias in Caria 1989-1992,\'94 AJA 99 (1995) 33-58\
\
smith1996\
\{\}- in C. Rouech\'e9 and R.R.R. Smith (eds.), Aphrodisias Papers 3 Ann Arbor, 1996.\
\
susini1973\
SUSINI, G., The Roman Stone Cutter: An introduction to Latin Epigraphy Oxford, 1973. \
\
thomas1990\
THOMAS, E. and WITSCHEL C. \'91Construction Reconstruction: Claim and reality in Roman building inscriptions from the Latin\
West\'92, PBSR (1990) 135-177.\
\
tracy1990\
TRACY, S. Attic Letter-Cutters of 229 to 86 BC, Cincinnati, 1990.\
\
tracy1995\
\{\}- Athenian Democracy in Transition: Attic Letter-Cutters of 340 to 290 BC, Berkeley, 1995\
\
tracy2003\
\{\}- Athens and Macedon: Attic Letter-Cutters of 300-229 BC, Berkeley 2003. \
\
woolf1996\
WOOLF G. (1996) \'91Monumental Writing and the Expansion of Roman Society in the Early Empire\'92, JRS 84, 22-39\
\
%13\
verreth2013\
Verreth, Herbert, Topography of Egypt online, in Proceedings of the 27th International Congress of Papyrology in\
Warsaw, July-August 2013 (forthcoming)\
%17\
\
Barbieri2015\
Barbieri, G., Didici, Loescher, Torino 2015.\
\
Bigi2014\
Bigi, F., Towards an EAGLE Standard in Translating Inscriptions, in S. Orlandi, R. Santucci, V. Casarosa, P.M. Liuzzo\
(curr.), Information Technologies for Epigraphy and Cultural Heritage, Proceedings of the First EAGLE International\
Conference, Rome 2014, 167-178.\
\
Boldrighini2014\
Boldrighini, F., La casa di Properzio ad Assisi. Aristocrazie municipali e cultura urbana tra la fine della repubblica e\
l\'92inizio dell\'92et\'e0 imperiale, Napoli 2014.\
\
Carpenter2006\
Carpenter, B., Magister Discipulis H F: Using Funerary Epigraphy with Intermediate Students of Latin, 2006\
(https://camws.org/cpl/cplonline/files/Carpentercplonline/pdf).\
\
Coarelli1991\
Coarelli, F., Assisi repubblicana: riflessioni su un caso di autoromanizazione, Atti Accademia Properziana del Subasio,\
6 (1991), 5-22.\
\
Domenici2012\
Domenici, I., Id est, Paravia Pearson, Milano-Torino 2012.\
\
Forni1986\
Forni, G., I Properzi nel mondo romano: indagine prosopografica, in Bimillenario della morte di Properzio, Atti del\
Convegno Internazionale di Studi Properziani (Roma-Assisi, 21-26 maggio 1985), Assisi 1986, 175-197.\
\
Gambis2013\
Gambis Meini, N., Roffi, M., Guidotti Bacci, P., Agenda Latina, Bompiani, Milano 2013.\
\
Jahn1993\
Jahn, A., Il discorso di Claudio in Tac. Ann. XI 24 a confronto con la Tavola di Lione, in G. Reggi (ed.), Storici\
latini e storici greci di et\'e0 imperiale, Atti del corso d\'92aggiornamento per docenti di latino e greco del Canton Ticino\
(Lugano, 17-19 ottobre 1990), Lugano 1993, 73-101.\
\
Hartnett2012\
Hartnett, M., By Roman Hands: Inscriptions and Graffiti for Students of Latin, Newburyport MA 2012.\
\
McCarthy1992\
McCarthy, B.C.J., Latin Epigraphy for the Classroom, Amherst MA 1992 (http://people.umass.edu/\\~\{\}glawall/McCarthy.pdf).\
\
Reali2015\
Reali, M., Turazza, G., Parole di pietra: epigrafia e didattica del latino, in A. Balbo - M. Ricucci (curr.),\
Prospettive per l\'92insegnamento del latino. La didattica della lingua latina fra teoria e buone pratiche (I Quaderni\
della Ricerca, 16), Torino 2015, 47-58.\
\
Zuddas2006\
Zuddas, E., Le tracce topografiche di Properzio, Subasio, 14.1 (2006), 63-66.\
\
%18\
\
Broux2013a\
Broux, Y., Explicit Name Change in Roman Egypt, ChronEg, 88 (2013a), 313-336.\
\
Broux2013b\
Broux, Y., Creating a New Local Elite: The Establishment of the Metropolitan Orders of Roman Egypt, AfP, 59 (2013b),\
142-152.\
\
Broux2015a\
Broux, Y., Double Names and Elite Strategy in Roman Egypt (Studia Hellenistica 54), Leuven 2015a.\
\
Broux2015b\
Broux, Y., Re: Apatores. Identification Issues and Loss of Status in Roman Egypt, ZPE, 194 (2015b), 212-214.\
\
Broux2015c\
Broux, Y., Graeco-Egyptian Naming Practices: A Network Perspective, GRBS, 55 (2015c), 706-720.\
\
Broux2010\
Broux, Y., Coussement, S., Depauw, M., \\textgreek\{Ka`i <wc qrhmat'izei \}and the Importance of Naming in Roman Egypt,\
ZPE, 174 (2010), 159-166.\
\
BrouxDepauw\
Broux, Y., Depauw, M., The Maternal Line in Greek Identification. Signalling Social Status in Roman Egypt, Historia, 64\
(2015), 467-478.\
\
BrouxVanbeselaere\
Broux, Y., Vanbeselaere, S., Identifying Individuals through Network Visualization, DHQ (forthcoming).\
\
Coussement\
Coussement, S., \'91Because I am Greek\'92: Polyonymy as an Expression of Ethnicity in Ptolemaic Egypt (Studia Hellenistica\
55), Leuven forthcoming.\
\
Depauw\
Depauw, M., Roman Influence on Rituals of Identification in Egypt, in P. Van Nuffelen, A.J. Zuiderhoek (eds.),\
Constructing (an) Imperial Identity? Ritual and Identity Formation in the Roman World, Gent forthcoming.\
\
Depauw2013\
Depauw, M., Clarysse, W., How Christian was Fourth-Century Egypt? Onomastic Perspectives on Conversion, VigChr, 67\
(2013), 407-435.\
\
Deapuw2009\
Depauw, M., Van Beek, B., People in Greek Documentary Papyri: First Results of a Research Project, JJP, 39 (2009),\
31-47.\
\
vanHooland\
van Hooland, S. et al., Exploring Entity Recognition and Disambiguation for Cultural Heritage Collections. Literary and\
Linguistics Computing, DSH (forthcoming).\
\
%20\
\
Bonacini2013\
Bonacini, E., Communication and enhancement of Italian cultural heritage by Google, Palabra Clave (La Plata), 2, 2\
(2013), 49-63.\
\
Bonacini2014\
Bonacini, E., Google e il patrimonio culturale italiano, SCIRES, 4, 1 (2014), 25-40.\
\
Farman\
Farman, J., Mapping the digital empire: Google Earth and the process of postmodern cartography, New Media \\&Society, 12,\
6 (2010), 869-888.\
\
Orsi1895\
Orsi, P., Nuove esplorazioni nelle catacombe di San Giovanni nel 1894, Notizie degli Scavi dell\'92Antichit\'e0, 3 (1895),\
477-521.\
\
Scandurra2014\
Scandurra, C., Iscrizione in marmo di Nassiane, in G. Lamagna e R. Amato (cur.), La Rotonda di Adelfia. Testimonianze\
archeologiche dalla catacomba di San Giovanni, Palermo 2014, p. 24.\
\
Sgarlata2004\
Sgarlata, M., San Giovanni a Siracusa, Citt\'e0 del Vaticano 2004.\
\
\
Sgarlata2013\
Sgarlata, M, Parole e immagini nelle catacombe di Siracusa, in F. Bisconti e M. Braconi (cur.), Incisioni figurate della\
Tarda Antichit\'e0. Atti del Convegno di Studi (Roma, Palazzo Massimo, 22-23 marzo 2012), Citt\'e0 del Vaticano 2013,\
511-523.\
\
\
%21\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Bibliography\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Guarducci, M., Epigrafia Greca, I-IV, Roma 1967-1978.\
\
Jeffery, L.H., The Local Scripts of Archaic Greece, revised edition with a supplement of A.W. Johnston, Oxford 1990.\
\
Robert, J. \\& L. Robert, La Carie. Histoire et G\'e9ographie historique avec le recueil des inscriptions antiques, Paris\
1954.\
\
Hansen, M.H. \\& Th.H. Nielsen (eds.), An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis, Oxford 2004. \
\
Hansen, M.H., Polis. An Introduction to the Ancient Greek City-State, Oxford 2006.\
Hansen, M.H., Polis. An Introduction to the Ancient Greek City-State, Oxford 2006.\
\
%22\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Antonini, A., Osservazioni sul graffito all\'92esterno della scodella dai regna Maricae (Minturno LT), in Quaderni\
Coldragonesi, 3 (2012), 11-22.\
\
Baldi, Ph., The Foundations of Latin, Berlin-New York 2002.\
\
Bodard, G., EpiDoc: Epigraphic Documents in XML for Publication and Interchange, in F. Feraudi-Gru\'e9nais, (cur.), Latin\
on Stone: epigraphic research and electronic archives, Lanham 2010, 101-118.\
\
Burnard, L., Bauman, S. (cur.), TEI P5:Guidelines for Electronic Text \\ Encoding and Interchange, 2014,\
http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/.\
\
Colonna, G., Le iscrizioni di Satricum, in M. Gnade, (cur.), Satricum. Trent\'92anni di scavi olandesi, Catalogo della\
Mostra. Le Ferriere \'96 Latina, 26 ottobre 2007-28 febbraio 2008, Amsterdam 2008, 98-99 and 194-197, nr. 634.\
\
Cuzzolin, P., Haverling G., Syntax, sociolinguistics, and literary genres, in Ph. Baldi, P. Cuzzolin (cur.), New\
perspectives on historical Latin syntax: syntax of the sentence, Berlin 2009, 19-64.\
\
Elliott, T., Bodard, G., Cayless, H. et al., EpiDoc: Epigraphic Documents in TEI XML. Online material, 2006-2013,\
http://epidoc.sf.net.\
\
Elliot, T., Conformance and Interoperability: What it means to be EpiDoc, 2007,\
http://www.stoa.org/epidoc/gl/5/conformance.html.\
\
Felle, A.E., Esperienze diverse e complementari nel trattamento digitale delle fonti epigrafiche: il caso di EAGLE ed\
EpiDoc, in N. Palazzolo (cur.), Diritto romano e scienze antichistiche nell\'92era digitale, Convegno di studio (Firenze,\
12-13 settembre 2011), Collectanea Graeco-Romana 10, Torino 2012, 117-130.\
\
Gamurrini, G.F., Paleografia del monumento, in G. Boni, Stele con iscrizione latina arcaica, Roma 1899, 11-21.\
\
Goidanich, P.G., Rapporti culturali e linguistici tra Roma e gli Italici. Origine antica della cultura in Roma.\
L\'92iscrizione arcaica del Foro Romano e il suo ambiente archeologico. Suo valore giuridico, RAL, 7/ 3 (1943), 317-501.\
\
Hartmann, M., Die fr\'fchlateinischen Inschriften und ihre Datierung. Eine linguistisch-arch\'e4ologisch-pal\'e4ographische\
Untersuchung, Bremen 2005.\
\
H\'fclsen, Ch., Neue Funde auf dem Forum Romanum, Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift, 19, n. 31-32 (1899), col. 1002.\
\
Krummrey, H., Panciera, S., Criteri di edizione e segni diacritici, Tituli, 2 (1980), 205-215.\
\
Mahoney, A., Epigraphy, in L. Burnard, K. O\'92Brian O\'92Keeffe, J. Unsworth, (cur.), Electronic Textual Editing, New York\
2006, 224-237.\
\
Maras, D.F., Storie di dono: l\'92oggetto parlante si racconta, in M.-L. Haack (cur.), L\'92\'e9criture et l\'92espace de la mort.\
\'c9pigraphie et n\'e9cropoles \'e0 l\'92\'e9poque pr\'e9-romaine, Rome 2015, http://books.openedition.org/efr/2730.\
\
Panciera, S., Segni diacritici: riflessioni e proposte, in Panciera, S., Epigrafi, Epigrafia, Epigrafisti. Scritti vari\
editi e inediti (1956-2005) con note complementari e indici, Volume II, Edizioni Quasar, Roma 2006a, 1711-1717.\
\
Panciera, S., I segni diacritici: dieci anni dopo, in Panciera, S., Epigrafi, Epigrafia, Epigrafisti. Scritti vari editi\
e inediti (1956-2005) con note complementari e indici, Volume II, Roma 2006b, 1717-1726.\
\
Poccetti, P., Paradigmi formulari votivi nelle tradizioni epicoriche dell\'92Italia antica, in J. Bodel, M. Kajava (cur.),\
Dediche sacre nel mondo greco-romano. Diffusione, funzioni, tipologie - Institutum Romanum Finlandiae, American Academy\
in Rome, 19-20 aprile 2006, Roma 2009, 43-93.\
\
Prosdocimi A.L., La Roma \'91Tarquinia\'92 nella lingua: forme e contenuti tra il prima e il dopo, in G. Della Fina (cur.) La\
grande Roma dei Tarquini. Atti del XVII Convegno Internazionale di Studi sulla Storia e l\'92Archeologia dell\'92Etruria\
(2009), Annali per la fondazione del Museo Claudio Faina 17, Roma 2010, 367-489.\
\
Rocca G., I rapporti del latino con le variet\'e0 italiche19. Il caso di Satricum, in \'93Nomen Latinum\'94. Latini e Romani\
prima di Annibale, Atti del Convegno Internazionale, Roma 24-26 ottobre 1995, Eutopia IV, 1 (1995), 189-198.\
\
Sarullo, G., L\'92edizione digitale dei testi epigrafici come strumento di ricerca. III The Encoding of the Archaic Latin\
Inscriptions, in P. Cotticelli Kurras (cur.), Linguistica e Filologia digitale. Aspetti e progetti, Alessandria 2011,\
157-169.\
\
Susini, G., Epigrafia romana, Roma 1982.\
\
Stibbe, C.M., et al., Lapis Satricanus. Archaeological, epigraphical, linguistic and historical aspects of the new\
inscription from Satricum, The Hague 1980.\
\
Tissoni, F., EpiDoc e l\'92epigrafia latina sul web. Il progetto Iscrizioni Latine Arcaiche, ACME, LXI, III (2008), 29-49.\
\
Vine B., Studies in Archaic Latin Inscriptions, Innsbr\'fccker Beitr\'e4ge zur Sprachwissenschaft 75, Innsbruck 1993. \
\
Wachter R., Altlateinische Inschriften, New York 1987.\
\
%24\
\
CTS = Canonical Text Services (protocol to cite digitally-available texts in a canonical way).\
\
EAGLE = The Europeana network of Ancient Greek and Latin Epigraphy: \\ http://www.eagle-network.eu/\
\
IEs = Integrating Digital Epigraphies project.\
\
LGPN = The Lexicon of Greek Personal Names: http://www.lgpn.ox.ac.uk/\
\
Luj\'e1n, E. R. \'96 Ordu\'f1a, E. (forthcoming), \'93Implementing a database for the analysis of ancient inscriptions: the Hesperia\
electronic corpus of Palaeohispanic inscriptions\'94, in: Tara Andrews \'96 Caroline Mac\'e9 (eds.), Methods and means for\
digital analysis of ancient and medieval texts and manuscripts, Lovaina, Peeters, forthcoming.\
\
MLH = Untermann, J. (1975-1997), Monumenta Linguarum Hispanicarum, Wiesbaden.\
\
Moncunill, E. (forthcoming), \'93Ochocientos antrop\'f3nimos ib\'e9ricos\'94, Actas del XIV Congreso de Estudios Cl\'e1sicos,\
\\ forthcoming.\
\
Ordu\'f1a, E. \'96 Luj\'e1n, E. R. (forthcoming), \'93Philology and technology in the Hesperia databank\'94, Journal of History,\
Literature, Science and Technology (JHLiST), forthcoming.\
\
Pleiades = A community-built gazetteer and graph of ancient places: \\ http://pleiades.stoa.org/\
\
SNAP = Standards for Networking Ancient Prosopographies project: http://snapdrgn.net/\
\
Trismegistos = Interdisciplinary portal of papyrological and epigraphical resources formerly Egypt and the Nile valley\
(800 BC-AD 800): http://www.trismegistos.org/\
\
Vallejo, J. M. (forthcoming), \'93Antroponimia antigua de la pen\'ednsula ib\'e9rica: sistemas de derivaci\'f3n\'94, Actas del XIV\
Congreso de Estudios Cl\'e1sicos, \\ forthcoming.\
\
Velaza, J. (2009), \'93Epigraf\'eda y literacy paleohisp\'e1nica en territorio vasc\'f3n: notas para un balance provisional\'94, in:\
Acta Palaeohispanica IX. Actas del Coloquio sobre lenguas y culturas paleohisp\'e1nicas, Zaragoza, 611-622.\
\
Velaza, J. (2014), \'93Hesperia: un nou concepte de corpus epigr\'e0fic online\'94, Auriga 73, 44-45.\
\
%28\
%29\
Abate, D., \\& Fanti, F. (2014). La valorizzazione digitale del Museo Geologico Giovanni Capellini di Bologna.\
Archeomatica, 5(1).\
\
Aswatha, S. M., Talla, A. N., Mukhopadhyay, J., \\& Bhowmick, P. (2014). A Method for Extracting Text from Stone\
Inscriptions Using Character Spotting. In ACCV 2014 Workshops, 598-611.\
\
Babeu, A. (2011). \{\\textquotedbl\}Rome Wasn't Digitized in a Day\{\\textquotedbl\}: Building a Cyberinfrastructure for\
Digital Classics. Council on Library and Information Resources.\
\
Barmpoutis, A., Bozia, E., \\& Fortuna, D. (2015). Interactive 3D Digitization, Retrieval, and Analysis of Ancient\
Sculptures, Using Infrared Depth Sensors for Mobile Devices. In Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Access\
to the Human Environment and Culture, 3-11.\
\
B\'f6hler, W., \\& Marbs, A. (2004). 3D scanning and photogrammetry for heritage recording: a comparison. In Proceedings of\
the 12th International Conference on Geoinformatics, 291-298.\
\
Bozia, E., Barmpoutis, A., \\& Wagman, R. (2014). Open-Access Epigraphy: Electronic Dissemination of 3D-digitized\
Archaeological Material. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Technologies for Epigraphy and\
Digital Cultural Heritage in the Ancient World, 421-435.\
\
Cooper, M., La Pens\'b4ee, A., and Bryan, P. (2007). Chiswick House, London: Laser scanning tests on a gilded 18th century\
table. English Heritage Research Department Series Report 19/2007. Swindon, England: Historic Buildings and Monuments\
Commission for England. \
\
Esteban, C. H., \\& Schmitt, F. (2004). Silhouette and stereo fusion for 3D object modeling. Computer Vision and Image\
Understanding, 96(3), 367-392.\
\
Gonizzi Barsanti, S. and Guidi, G. (2013). 3D digitization of museum content within the 3D icons project. ISPRS Annals\
of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, II-5/W1, 151\'96156. \
\
Ikei, Y., Shimabukuro, S., Kato, S., Komase, K., Hirota, K., Amemiya, T., \\& Kitazaki, M. (2015). Experience Simulator\
for the Digital Museum. In Human Interface and the Management of Information. Information and Knowledge in Context,\
436-446.\
\
Landon, G. V. and Seales, W. B. \\ (2006). Petroglyph digitization:enabling cultural heritage scholarship. Machine Vision\
and Applications, 17, 361\'96371.\
\
Levoy, M. et al. (2000). The digital Michelangelo project: 3D scanning of large statues. In Procedings of the SIGGRAPH.\
\
Malzbender, T., Gelb, D., and Wolters, H. (2001). Polynomial texture maps. In Computer Graphics, In Proceedings of ACM\
Siggraph.\
\
Osman, M. A., Talib, A. Z., Sanusi, Z. A., Yen, T. S., \\& Alwi, A. S. (2011). An exploratory study on the trend of\
smartphone usage in a developing country. Digital enterprise and information systems, 387-396.\
\
Papadaki, A. I., Agrafiotis, P., Georgopoulos, A., \\& Prignitz, S. \\ (2015). \\ Accurate 3d Scanning of Damaged Ancient\
Greek Inscriptions for Revealing Weathered Letters. International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and\
Spatial Information Sciences, 1, 237-243.\
\
Pavlidis, G., Koutsoudis, A., Arnaoutoglou, F., Tsioukas, V., \\& Chamzas, C. (2007). Methods for 3D digitization of\
cultural heritage. Journal of cultural heritage, 8(1), 93-98.\
\
Pollefeys, M., Van Gool, L. J., Vergauwen, M., Cornelis, K., Verbiest, F., and Tops, J. \\ (2001). Image-based 3D\
acquisition of archaeological heritage and applications. In Proceedings of the 2001 conference on Virtual reality,\
archeology, and cultural heritage, 255\'96262.\
\
Preece, J., Sharp, H., \\& Rogers, Y. (2015). Interaction Design beyond human-computer interaction. John Wiley \\& Sons.\
\
Ram\'edrez-S\'e1nchez, M., Su\'e1rez-Rivero, J. P., \\& Castellano-Hern\'e1ndez, M. \'c1. (2014). Epigraf\'eda digital: tecnolog\'eda 3D de\
bajo coste para la digitalizaci\'f3n de inscripciones y su acceso desde ordenadores y dispositivos m\'f3viles. El profesional\
de la informaci\'f3n, 23(5), 467-474.\
\
Soile, S., Adam, K., Ioannidis, C. and Georgopoulos, A. (2013). Accurate 3d textured models of vessels for the\
improvement of the educational tools of a museum. ISPRS-International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing\
and Spatial Information Sciences, 1(1), \\ 211\'96217.\
\
Sullivan, S. M. (2011). Analytical methods for the extraction of content from high resolution 3D data sets: Epigraphical\
applications to the Drakon Stele. Doctoral dissertation, University of Arkansas.\
\
Ujitoko, Y., \\& Hirota, K. (2015). Application of the Locomotion Interface Using Anthropomorphic Finger Motion. In Human\
Interface and the Management of Information. Information and Knowledge in Context, 666-674.\
\
Wachowiak, M. J. and Karas, B. V. (2009). 3D scanning and replication for museum and cultural heritage applications.\
Journal of the American Institute for Conservation, 48(2), 141\'96158. \
%31\
\
\
\
Castelli, G. L., Principe di Torremuzza, Siciliae et objacentium insularum veterum inscriptionum nova collectio\
prolegomenis et notis illustrata, et iterum cum emendationibus, \\& auctariis evulgata, Palermo 1784.\
\
Cotton, H. M. and Price, J., Corpus inscriptionum Iudaeae / Palestinae: a multilingual corpus of inscriptions, in M.\
Mayer i Oliv\'e9, G. Baratta, A. Guzm\'e1n Almagro (eds.), XII Congressus Internationalis Epigraphiae Graecae et Latinae,\
Acta, Barcelona 2007, 327-332.\
\
Cotton, H. M., Di Segni, L., Eck, W., Isaac, B., Corpus Inscriptionum Judaeae/Palaestinae, ZPE, 127 (1999), 307\'96308.\
\
De Vido, S., \\ Corpora epigrafici siciliani da Gualtherus a Kaibel, in M. I. Gulletta (ed.), Sicilia Epigraphica. Atti\
del convegno internazionale, Erice, 15-18 ottobre 1998, Pisa 1999, I, 221-250.\
\
Dubois, L., Inscriptions grecques dialectales de Sicile : contribution \'e0 l'\'e9tude du vocabulaire grec colonial, Rome\
1989.\
\
Dubois, L., Inscriptions grecques dialectales de Sicile. Tome II, Geneva 2008.\
\
Gulletta, M. I. (ed.), Sicilia Epigraphica. Atti del convegno internazionale, Erice, 15-18 ottobre 1998, 2 vols., Pisa\
1999. \
\
Kaibel, G., Inscriptiones Italiae et Siciliae (= IG XIV), Berlin 1890.\
\
Korhonen, K., Language and Identity in the Roman Colonies of Sicily, in R. J. Sweetman (ed.), Roman Colonies in the\
First Century of their Foundation, Oxford 2011, 7-31.\
\
Manganaro, G., Greco nei pagi e latino nelle citt\'e0 della Sicilia romana tra I e VI sec. d.C., in A. Calbi, A. Donati and\
G. Poma (eds), L'epigrafia del villaggio, Faenza 1993, 543-594.\
\
Mommsen, T., Inscriptiones Bruttiorum Lucaniae Campaniae Siciliae Sardiniae Latinae. Pars posterior. Inscriptiones\
Siciliae et Sardiniae (= CIL X.2), Berlin 1883.\
\
Orlandi, S., Santucci, R., Casarosa, V. and Liuzzo, P. M. (eds.), Information Technologies for Epigraphy and Cultural\
Heritage, Proceedings of the First EAGLE International Conference, Rome 2014, online at: Sapienza Universit\'e0 Editrice.\
Published online at: http://www.eagle-network.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Paris-Conference-Proceedings.pdf [Accessed\
26.09.2015].\
\
Prag, J. R. W., Epigraphy by numbers: Latin and the epigraphic culture in Sicily, in A. E. Cooley (ed.), Becoming Roman,\
Writing Latin?, Portsmouth RI 2002, 15-31.\
\
Prag, J. R. W., Nouveaux regards sur les \'e9lites locales de la Sicile r\'e9publicaine, in Histoires et soci\'e9t\'e9s rurales, 19\
(2003), 121\\nobreakdash-132.\
\
Prag, J. R. W., Sicily and the Roman Republic 241-44 BC: provincialization and provincial identities, PhD thesis,\
Department of History, University College London, 2004.\
\
Prag, J. R. W., Ciceronian Sicily: the epigraphic dimension, in J. Dubouloz, S. Pittia (eds), La Sicile de Cic\'e9ron,\
Lectures des Verrines, Besan\'e7on, 2007, 245\\nobreakdash-271.\
\
Prag, J. R. W., Sicilia and Britiannia: Epigraphic Evidence for Civic Administration, in C. Berrendonner, M. C\'e9beillac\
Gervasoni and L. Lamoine (eds), Le Quotidien municipal dans l\'92Occident romain, Clermont-Ferrand, 2008,\
67\\nobreakdash-81.\
\
Prag, J. R. W., Sicilia Romana tributim discripta, in M. Silvestrini (ed.), Le trib\'f9 romane. Atti della XVIe Rencontre\
sur l\'92\'e9pigraphie (Bari 8-10 ottobre 2009), Bari, 2010, 305\\nobreakdash-311.\
\
Salmeri, G., I caratteri della grecit\'e0 di Sicilia e la colonizzazione romana, in G. Salmeri, A. Raggi and A. Baroni\
(eds), Colonie romane nel mondo greco, Rome 2004, 255-308.\
\
Tribulato, O. (ed.), Language and linguistic contact in ancient Sicily, Cambridge 2012.\
\
Wilson, R., R. Talbert, S. Gillies, J. \'c5hlfeldt, J. Prag, J. Becker, T. Elliott, Places: 462097 (Apollonia), in Pleiades\
\{\\textless\}http://pleiades.stoa.org/places/462097\{\\textgreater\} [accessed 26.09.2015].\
\
%32\
MISSING DOC\
\
%33\
ALREADY IN\
\
%36\
ALREADY IN\
\
%38\
\
Brugnoli, A., Riproduzione di beni culturali. Appello al ministro Bray, in ROARS (25/09/2013)\\newline\
http://www.roars.it/online/riproduzione-di-beni-culturali-appello-al-ministro-bray/\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Brugnoli, A., Ancora sulla riproduzione dei beni culturali, in ROARS (05/10/2014)\\newline\
http://www.roars.it/online/ancora-sulla-riproduzione-dei-beni-culturali/\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Brugnoli, A., Gardini, S., Fotografia digitale, beni archivistici e utenti: l\'92impiego e la diffusione di una nuova\
tecnologia nella normativa e nelle iniziative dell\'92amministrazione archivistica, in Archivi e Computer, marzo 2013, pp.\
213-256\\newline\
https://goo.gl/R6Lj8u\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Casini, L., Gli archivi nella riforma dei Beni Culturali, in Aedon, 1, 2015:\\newline\
http://www.aedon.mulino.it/archivio/2015/1/casini.htm\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
\\subsubsection[Ciociola, C., Libere riproduzioni negli archivi e nelle biblioteche, in Treccani PEM\
(18/06/2015)]\{Ciociola, C., Libere riproduzioni negli archivi e nelle biblioteche, in Treccani PEM (18/06/2015)\}\
http://www.treccani.it/magazine/cultura/Libere\\_riproduzioni\\_negli\\_archivi\\_e\\_nelle\\_biblioteche.html\\#\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Gallo, G., Il decreto Art Bonus e la riproducibilit\'e0 dei beni culturali, in Aedon, 3, 2014\\newline\
http://www.aedon.mulino.it/archivio/2014/3/gallo.htm\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Giunta, C., Viva l\'92epoca della riproducibilit\'e0 tecnica!, in Domenicale del Sole 24 ore (04/01/2015)\\newline\
http://www.claudiogiunta.it/2015/01/viva-lepoca-della-riproducibilita-tecnica/\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Lupoli, R., Libere foto di fonti documentarie in archivi e biblioteche in libero Stato, in Left (11/03/2015)\\newline\
http://www.left.it/2015/03/11/libera-foto-di-fonti-documentarie-in-archivi-e-biblioteche-in-libero-stato/\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Manacorda, D., \\ FOTOGRAFARE in D. Manacorda, L\'92Italia agli Italiani. Istruzioni e ostruzioni per il patrimonio\
culturale, Bari 2014, pp. 87-92. FOTOGRAFARE da Manacorda L\'92Italia agli italiani 23-1\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Manacorda, D., Petrolio, in L. Carletti, C. Giometti (a cura di), De Tutela. Idee a confronto per la salvaguardia del\
patrimonio culturale e paesaggistico, Pisa 2014, pp. 117-123\\newline\
https://goo.gl/yZDsNi\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Modolo, M., Il sogno infranto delle libere riproduzioni, in Il Giornale dell\'92Arte, p. 10 (settembre 2014)\\newline\
http://www.ilgiornaledellarte.com/articoli/2014/9/120926.html\
\
\\newline\
Modolo, M., Ricerca storica e libert\'e0 di scatto. Una raccolta firme a favore della riproduzione libera e gratuita delle\
fonti documentarie in archivi e biblioteche, in Giornale dell\'92Arte (10/04/2015)\\newline\
http://www.ilgiornaledellarte.com/articoli/2015/4/123892.html\
\
\\newline\
Pavolini, C., La situazione attuale delle Soprintendenze: alcune proposte, in Patrimonio SOS (13/04/2015)\\newline\
http://www.patrimoniosos.it/rsol.php?op=getintervento\\&id=1138\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Pigliaru, A., Un selfie pagato a caro prezzo in Il Manifesto (17/06/2015)\
\
http://ilmanifesto.info/un-selfie-pagato-a-caro-prezzo/\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Stella, G. A., La gabella (da abolire) che pesa sugli studiosi, in Il Corriere della Sera, p. 45 (5/11/2014)\\newline\
http://archiviostorico.corriere.it/2014/novembre/05/gabella\\_abolire\\_che\\_pesa\\_sugli\\_co\\_0\\_20141105\\_af23163c-64b8-11e4-8d09-2f9615f0b0f8.shtml\
\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Stella, G. A., Le costose riproduzioni dei nostri libri antichi, in Il Corriere della Sera, p. 45 (04/03/2015)\\newline\
http://archiviostorico.corriere.it/2015/marzo/04/costose\\_riproduzioni\\_dei\\_nostri\\_libri\\_co\\_0\\_20150304\\_94c0dea4-c23d-11e4-b691-b924edc2da74.shtml\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Stella, G. A., Biblioteche, scene da una catastrofe, in Il Corriere della Sera\
\
(12/09/2015)\
\
http://www.patrimoniosos.it/rsol.php?op=getarticle\\&id=120682\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Tumicelli, A., La questione giuridica della riproduzione dei beni bibliografici e archivistici (05/12/2014)\\newline\
http://www.diritto.it/docs/36721-la-questione-giuridica-della-riproduzione-deibeni-bibliografici-e-archivistici \
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Volpe, G., L\'92immagine negata, in Il Manifesto (30/01/2014)\\newline\
http://www.giulianovolpe.it/it/14/L\\%E2\\%80\\%99immagine\\_negata/317/\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Lettera aperta al Ministro Franceschini di un dottorando californiano per la libera riproduzione in archivi e\
biblioteche, in Patrimonio SOS (01/03/2015)\
\
http://www.patrimoniosos.it/rsol.php?op=getarticle\\&id=116621\
\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Appello delle Societ\'e0 Scientifiche al Ministro Bray per la fotografia digitale, in Reti Medievali (11/09/2013)\\newline\
http://www.rm.unina.it/index.php?action=viewnews\\&news=1379082134\
%40\
\
Carletti \\ 2008\\ \\ C. Carletti, Epigrafia dei cristiani in Occidente dal III al VII secolo. Ideologia e prassi, Bari\
2008. \
\
Iscrizioni 1997\\ \\ Le iscrizioni dei cristiani in Vaticano, \\ a cura di I. Di Stefano Manzella, Citt\'e0 del Vaticano 1997.\
\
Eastmond 2015\\ \\ A. Eastmond (ed.), Viewing Inscriptions in the Late Antique and Medieval World, Cambridge University\
Press, New York 2015.\
\
Felle \\ 2006\\ \\ Biblia Epigraphica. La Sacra Scrittura nella documentazione epigrafica dell\'92Orbis christianus antiquus\
(III-VIII secolo) [ICI, Subsidia, V], Bari 2006.\
\
Felle \\ 2007\\ \\ A. E. Felle, Judaism and Christianity in the light of epigraphic evidence (3rd\{\}-7th cent. C.E.), Henoch\
29, 2007, pp. 354-377.\
\
Felle \\ 2013\\ \\ A. E. Felle, L'apporto dell'Epigraphic Database Bari (EDB) all'analisi dell'apparato figurativo delle\
iscrizioni dei cristiani di Roma, in Incisioni figurate della Tarda antichit\'e0. Atti del Convegno di Studi (Roma, 22-23\
marzo 2012), a cura di F. Bisconti - M. Braconi, Citt\'e0 del Vaticano 2013, 99-112.\
\
Felle \\ 2015\\ \\ A. E. Felle, Esporre la Scrittura. L'uso di testi biblici in epigrafi d'ambito pubblico fra tarda\
antichit\'e0 e prima et\'e0 bizantina (sec. IV-VIII), Antiquit\'e9 Tardive 23, 2015, 311-328.\
\
Felle (in press)\\ \\ A. E. Felle, Documenti~epigrafici di committenza ebraica. Omologazione e alterit\'e0, in M. Pesce - A.\
Destro (edd.), Texts, Practices, and Groups. Multidisciplinary approaches to the istory of Jesus Followers in the first\
two centuries. First Annual Meeting of Bertinoro (2-4 October 2014), [Juda\'efsme Ancien et Origines Chr\'e9tiennes, 1],\
Turnhout 2016, in press.\
\
Felle, Zimmermann 2014\\ \\ A. E. Felle, N. Zimmermann, Epigraphy, Art History, Archaeology. A Case of Interaction between\
Research Projects: The Epigraphic Database Bari (UniBa, Italy) and the Domitilla Projekt (\'d6AW, Austria - DAI,\
Deutschland), in Information Technologies for Epigraphy and Cultural Heritage. Proceedings of the First EAGLE\
International Conference \\ (Paris, September 29-30 - October, 1, 2014), Roma 2014, 75-96.\
\
K\'e4hler 1967\\ \\ H. K\'e4hler, Die Hagia Sophia. Mit einem Beitrag von Cyril Mango \'fcber die Mosaiken, Berlin \\ 1967.\
\
\'d6ffentlichkeit 2014\\ \\ \'d6ffentlichkeit - Monument - Text. XIV Congressus Internationalis Epigraphiae Graecae et Latinae.\
Akten (Berlin, 27.-31. August 2012),~hrsg. Eck W.-Funke P. et alii, Berlin 2014.\
\
%42\
\
Austin, C., Bastianini, G., Posidippi Pellaei quae supersunt omnia, Milano 2002. \
\
Baumbach, M., Petrovic, A., Petrovic, I. (edd.), Archaic and Classical Greek Epigram, Cambridge 2010.\
\
Bonifazi, A., Deixis (including 1st and 2nd person), in Giannakis G. (ed.), Encyclopedia of Ancient Greek Language and\
Linguistics, vol. 1, Leiden-Boston 2014, 422-429.\
\
B\'fchler, K., Sprachtheorie: die Darstellungsfunktion der Sprache, Stuttgart-New York 1982 (Jena 19341).\
\
Burzachechi, M., Oggetti parlanti nelle epigrafi greche, Epigraphica, 24 (1962), 3-54.\
\
CEG = Carmina epigraphica Graeca, ed. Hansen, P.A., 1 (saeculorum VIII-V a.Chr.n.)-2 (saeculi IV a.Chr.n.),\
Berolini-Novi Eboraci 1983 (1), 1989 (2).\
\
Christian, T., Gebildete Steine. Zur Rezeption literarischer Techniken in den Versinschriften seit dem Hellenismus,\
G\'f6ttingen 2015.\
\
D\'92Alessio, G.B., Past future and present past: temporal deixis in Greek Archaic Lyric, Arethusa, 37 (2004), 267-294.\
\
Day, J.W., Archaic Greek Epigram and Dedication. Representation and Reperformance, Cambridge 2010.\
\
Diessel, H., Deixis and demonstratives, in Maienborn-von Heusinger-Portner 2012 [q.v.], vol. 3, 2407-2431.\
\
Edmunds, L., Deixis in Ancient Greek and Latin literature: historical introduction and state of the question, Philologia\
Antiqua, 1 (2008), 67-98.\
\
Felson, N. (ed.), The Poetics of Deixis in Alcman, Pindar, and Other Lyric, Artethusa, 37, 253-465.\
\
Furley, W.D., Life in a line: a reading of dedicatory epigrams from the archaic and classical period, in\
Baumbach-Petrovic-Petrovic 2010 [q.v.], 151-166.\
\
Garulli, V., Byblos Lainee. Epigrafia, letteratura, epitafio, Bologna 2012.\
\
Gow, A.S.F, Page, D.L., The Greek Anthology, [1] Hellenistic Epigrams, Cambridge 1965.\
\
Gutzwiller, K.J., Poetic Garlands. Hellenistic Epigrams in Context, Berkeley-Los Angeles-London 1998.\
\
Klein, W., Time in Language, London-New York 1994.\
\
Lazzarini, M.L., Le formule delle dediche votive nella Grecia arcaica, MAL, 19 s. 8 (1976), 47-356.\
\
Levinson, S.C., Pragmatics, Cambridge 1983.\
\
Lyons, J., Semantics, vol. 2, Cambridge 1977.\
\
Maienborn C., von Heusinger, K., Portner, P. (ed.), Semantics. An International Handbook of Natural Language Meaning, 3\
vols., Berlin-Boston 2011 (1-2), 2012 (3).\
\
Meyer, D., Inszeniertes Lesevergn\'fcgen: das inschriftliche Epigramm und seine Rezeption bei Kallimachos, Stuttgart 2005.\
\
Svenbro J., Phrasikleia. Anthropologie de la lecture en Gr\'e8ce ancienne, Paris 1988 (it. trans. Storia della lettura\
nella Grecia antica, Roma-Bari 1991).\
\
Tueller, M.A., Look Who\'92s Talking. Innovations in Voice and Identity in Hellenistic Epigram, Leuven 2008.\
\
Wachter, R., The origin of epigrams on \'91speaking objects\'92, in Baumbach-Petrovic-Petrovic 2010 [q.v.], 250-260.\
\
%43\
MISSING BIBLIO\
\
%44\
\
\\bigskip\
\
Algee, L., Bailey, J., Owens, T., Viewshare and the Kress Collection: Creating, Sharing, and Rapidly Prototyping Visual\
Interfaces to Cultural Heritage Collection Data, D-lib (2012).\
\
Bergstorm, P., Atkinson, D.C., Augmenting the exploration of digital libraries with web-based visualizations, ICDIM,\
(2009), 1-7.\
\
Bernard, J., Ruppert, T., Schrerer, M., Kohlhammer, J., Schreck, T., Content-based Layouts for Exploratory Metadata\
Search in Scientific Research Data, JCDL, (2012), 139-148.\
\
Buchel, O., Sedig, K., Making sense of document collections with map-based visualisations: the role of interaction with\
representations, Information Research (2014) 19(3), paper 63. \
\
Fast, K., V., Sedig, K., Interaction and the Epistemic Potential of Digital Libraries, Int. J. Digit. Libr., (2010),\
vol. 11, n. 3, 169-207.\
\
Ferreira, N., Lins, L., Fink, D., Kelling, S., Wood, C., Friere, J., Silva, C., BirdVis: Visualizing and Understanding\
Bird Populations, Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, (2011), 2374-2383.\
\
Hienert, D., Sawitzki, F., Schaer, P., Mayr, P., Integrating Interactive Visualizations in the Search Process of Digital\
Libraries and IR Systems, Advances in Information Retrieval Lecture Notes in Computer Science, (2012), 447-450.\
\
Liuzzo, P.M., Rivero Ruiz, E., Vassallo, V., Networking EAGLE with CIDOC and TEI. CIDOC 2014: Access and Understanding \'96\
Networking in the Digital Era, Dresden, Germany; 10/2014. \
\
Nan, C., Yu-RU, L., Xiaohua, S., Lazer, D., Shixia, L., Huamin, Q., Whisper: Tracing the Spatiotemporal Process of\
Information Diffusion in Real Time, Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, (2012), 2649-2658.\
\
Nasar, M., R., A., Mohd, M., Ali, N., M., A conceptual framework for an interactive personal information management\
system, i-USEr, (2011), 100-105.\
\
Pitzalis, D., \\ Christophorou E., Kyriakou N., \\ Georgiadou A., \\ Niccolucci F. (2012). Building scholar e-communities\
using a semantically aware framework: Archaia Kypriaki Grammateia Digital Corpus. In: VAST12 (2012) UK, 89\'9695.\
\
Ren, L., Tian, F., Zhang, L., Dai, G.., DaisyViz: A Model-based User Interfaces Toolkit for Development of Interactive\
Information Visualization, Visual Information Communication, (2010), 209-229.\
\
Ronzino, P., Niccolucci, F., Hermon, S., A Metadata schema for Cultural Heritage documentation, in EVA 2012 Florence,\
Firenze University Press.\
\
Vassallo, V., Christophorou, E., Hermon, S., Niccolucci, F., 2013, Re-vealing cross-disciplinary information through\
formal knowledge representation \'96 a proposed Metadata for ancient Cypriot inscriptions. In Conference Proceeding of\
Digital Heritage Heritage International Congress (Digital Heritage), IEEE. Ed. by A. Addison,L. De Luca, G. Guidi, and\
S. Pescarin. Vol. 2, pp. 79\'9682.\
\
Vassallo, V., Ronzino, P., Damnjanovic, U., Hermon, S., Un processo aperto di comunicazione della conoscenza. ArcheoFoss\
2013, 18-19 June 2013, Catania, Italy. In print on Archeopress.\
\
Voskos, A. (1997). \\textgreek\{>Arqa'ia Kupriak`h Grammate'ia. \}Nicosia: Epigramma. \
\
Wong, W., Chen, R., Kodagada, N., Rooney, C., Xu, K., INVISQUE: Intuitive Information Exploration Through Interactive\
Visualization, CHI EA, (2012), 311-316.\
\
\
%48\
\
\
Bassi, C., Tre lamellae perforatae da Savazzona-Quistello (Mantova), Epigraphica. Rivista Italiana di epigrafia LVIII\
(1996), 207-216\
\
Bizzarini, L., Quattro laminette plumbee da Altino, Annali del Museo Civico di Rovereto 21 (2005), 121-135\
\
Buchi, E., Buonopane, A., Le etichette plumbee rinveute a Feltre: aspetti onomastici, lessicali, economici e tecnici, in\
G. Curletti and N. Pisu (cur.) I territori della Via Claudia Augusta: Incontri di Archeologia / Leben an der Via\
Claudia Augusta: Arch\'e4ologische Beitr\'e4ge, herausgegeben von, Trento 2005, 43-51\
\
Cresci, G., Petten\'f2, E., Supellex ex plumbo. Laminae Concordienses. Le laminette commerciali da Iulia Concordia, AIV,\
168 (2009\'962010), 43\'96110\
\
Egger, R., F\'fcnf Bleietiketten und eine Gussform: die neuesten Magdalensbergfunde, Anzeiger der philologisch-historische\
Klasse der \'d6sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 104 (1967), 195-210\
\
Feug\'e8re, M., Une \'e9tiquette inscrite en plomb, Les fouilles de la Z.A.C. des Halles \'e0 N\'eemes (Gard), Bulletin de l\'92\'c9cole\
Antique de N\'eemes, Suppl. 1 (1993), 301-305\
\
Frei-Stolba, R., Les \'e9tiquettes en plomb: des documents de l\'92\'e9criture au quotidien, in:M. Corbier and J.-P. Guilhembert\
(dir.), L\'92\'e9criture dans la maison romaine, Paris, 2011, 331-344\
\
Jacques, A., Ho\'ebt-Cauwenberghe, C., Artisanat et commerce: Les \'e9tiquettes de plomb inscrites d\'e9couvertes \'e0 Arras\
(Nemetacum), REA 112/2 (2010), 295-317\
\
Lam\'e9, M., Primary Sources of Information, Digitization Processes and Dispositive Analysis, in F. Tomasi, R. Rosselli Del\
Turco, and A. M. Tammaro (Eds.), Humanities and Their Methods in the Digital Ecosystem. Proceedings of the Third AIUCD\
Annual Conference (AIUCD2014). New York, 2015.\
\
M\'f3csy, A., Olom \'e1ruc\'edmk\'e9k Sisci\'e1b\'f3l (Bolli romani da Siscia), FA 8 (1956), 97-104\
\
Paci, G., Etichette plumbee iscritte, Acta Colloquii Epigraphici Latini, Helsingiae, 3.-6. sept.1991 habiti,\
Commentationes Humanarum Litterarum 104 (1995), 29-40\
\
Palma, G., Baldassari, M., Favilla, M., AND Scopigno, R., Storytelling of a Coin Collection by Means of RTI Images: the\
Case of the Simoneschi Collection in Palazzo Blu. in N. Proctor \\& R. Cherry (eds). Museums and the Web 2013. 2014. \
\
Radman-Livaja, I., In Segestica..., Prilozi Instituta za Arheologiju u Zagrebu 24 (2007), 153\'96172\
\
Radman-Livaja, I., Le r\'f4le des \'e9tiquettes de plomb dans le travail du textile \'e0 Siscia, in C. Alfaro, J.-P. Brun, Ph.\
Borgard, R. Pierobon Benoit (eds.) PURPUREAE VESTES, III Symposium Internacional sobre Textiles y Tintes del\
Mediterr\'e1neo en el mundo antiguo. Valencia / Napoli, 2011, 181\'96196\
\
Radman-Livaja, I., Craftspeople, Merchants or Clients? The Evidence of Personal Names on the Commercial lead tags from\
Siscia, in M. Gleba and J. P\'e1szt\'f3kai-Sze\uc0\u337 ke (eds.), Making Textiles in Pre-Roman and Roman Times: People, Places,\
Identities, Ancient Textiles Series vol. 13, Oxford, 2013, 87-108\
\
Radman-Livaja, I., \\ Two Lead Tags from \'8atrbinci (Certissia?), Arheolo\'9aki radovi i rasprave 17 (2013), 165-180\
\
Radman-Livaja, I., Plombs de Siscia, Musei Archaeologici Zagrabiensis Catalogi et Monographiae, vol. IX, Zagreb, 2014\
\
Reuter, M., Scholz, M., Geritzt und entziffert, Scriftzeugnisse der r\'f6mischen Informationsgesellschaft, Schriften des\
Limesmuseums Aalen 57 (2004), Esslingen am Neckar\
\
R\'f6mer-Martijnse, E., Ein beschriftetes Bleit\'e4felchen \'96 Zeugnis handwerklicher T\'e4tigkeit in Carnuntum?, Carnuntum Jarbuch\
1987, 119-122\
\
R\'f6mer-Martijnse, E., R\'f6merzeitliche Bleietiketten aus Kalsdorf, Steiermark, Akten des 3. \'d6sterreichischen\
Arch\'e4ologentages Innsbruck, Wien, 1989, 171-174\
\
R\'f6mer-Martijnse, E., R\'f6merzeitliche Bleietiketten aus Kalsdorf, Steiermark, Wien 1990\
\
R\'f6mer-Martijnse, E., Eine fr\'fchkaiserzeitliche Handelsstation an der Via Claudia Augusta im Forggensee bei Dietringen,\
Lkr. Ostallg\'e4u, Alt F\'fcssen, Jahrbuch des Historischen Vereins Alt F\'fcssen, Jg. 1996 und Jg. 1997, W. Czysz und E.\
R\'f6mer-Martijnse, Teil II, Die beschrifteten Bleietiketten, 1997, 5-48\
\
Sabattini B., \'93Documenter le pr\'e9sent pour assurer l'avenir\'94, in Documentation for conservation and development new\
heritage strategy for the future, Actes du XI Forum Unesco Universit\'e9 et Patrimoine. Florence 11-15 September, 2006.\
https://www.academia.edu/15853068 \
\
Schwinden, L., R\'f6merzeitliche Bleietiketten aus Trier, Zum Handel mit Pfeffer, Arznei und Kork, TZ 48 (1985), 121-137 \
\
Schwinden, L., Zwei r\'f6mische Bleietiketten mit Graffiti aus Bliesbruck, Blesa 1 (1993), 215-222\
\
Terras, M., Opening Access to Collections: the Making and Using of Open Digitised Cultural Content. in G. E. Gorman and\
J. Rowley (eds.), Open Access: Redrawing the Landscape of Scholarly Communication. Online Information Review, Special\
Issue (2015).\
\
Wedenig, R., Ein Bleietikett mit Farbbezeichnung vom Residenzplatz in Salzburg-Iuvavum, in: P. Mauritsch and C. Ulf\
(Hrsg.), Kultur(en), Formen des Allt\'e4glichen in der Antike, Festchrift f\'fcr Ingomar Weiler zum 75. Geburtstag, Nummi et\
Litterae, Band VII, Graz, 2013, 237-250\
\
Weiss, P., Bleietiketten mit Warenangaben aus dem Umfeld von Rom, Tyche 6 (1991), 211-220\
\
Geert, W., Verbiest, F., Moreau, W., Hameeuw, H., Van Leberghe, K., and Van Gool, L., Easy and Cost-effective Cuneiform\
Digitizing. In M. Mudge, N. Ryan, and R. Scopigno (eds.) The 6th International Symposium on Virtual Reality Archaeology\
and Cultural Heritage VAST2005, 2005 73\'9680\
\
\
%XX\
Amato, G., Bolettieri P.,Gennaro C., Manghi P., Mannocci A., AIM Infrastructure Specification, Deliverable D4.1, EAGLE\
Project 2013.\
\
Amato, G., Bolettieri P., Falchi F., Manghi P., Mannocci A., Zoppi F., Second Release of AIM Infrastructure, Deliverable\
D4.2.1, EAGLE Project 2015.\
\
Fresa A., Justrell B., The Roadmap, CIVIC EPISTEMOLOGIES Project 2015.\
\
Prandoni C., Alfarano N., Casarosa V., EAGLE Portal, Deliverable D5.2, EAGLE Project 2014.\
\
Sicila M., Gomez Pantoja, J., Rubio Fuentes, M., Rivero Ruiz E., Mannocci A., Manghi P., Zoppi F., EAGLE metadata model\
specification \'96 Second Release, Deliverable D3.1, EAGLE Project 2015.\
\
}